<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
  <teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
      <titleStmt>
        <title type="part">Mattheson: Der Ober-Classe Siebendes Probstück</title>
      </titleStmt>
      <publicationStmt>
        <p>Niels Pfeffer</p>
      </publicationStmt>
      <sourceDesc>
        <p>Mattheson.</p>
      </sourceDesc>
    </fileDesc>
  </teiHeader>
  <text>
    <body>
      <head>Erläuterung</head>
      <div n="1" type="section">
        <head>§. 1.</head>
        <p>
          It can be noted daily, that no clef besides the high alto feels as strange as
          the common alto clef to a thorough-bass player. That is because when a boy has a skill and instruction in singing, there are
          among fifty merely two who sing altus: since everybody screams in the tiresome discant.
          Under those circumstances he only gets to know his clef and he does not concern himself with another one but with the bass clef.
          Therewith all his wisdom on keyboard instruments is revealed. Besides that, here in Germany we are digusted by the French
          solo pieces, although we welcome in an accepting and imitative manner everything that seems and is called French,
          even beating the time.  Every teacher considers his own births to be the best for teaching.
          However, I think, that he, even if he is composing
          so elegantly and is imitating I-do-not-know-who, one should always include the work of others, especially in teaching, and he
          should be told: <quote>Do not disrespect what others are doing and do not praise your own works</quote>.

          Anybody who has some skill in French pieces, will hardly find any difficulties in the clefs, since the changes of clefs
          appear nowhere else more frequently, though the pieces are easy to be played. A boy who considers
          becomming an organist once, is ashamed when taking a fiddle in the hand, almost as if it was humiliating. If you take
          this absurd respect from your subordinate and from time to time let him play a middle voice
          or a <foreign>Braccio</foreign>, the clefs will be better known to him.
          But enough for know, I just had to say, that this flaw caused me to use the common alto clef
          here more often.
        </p>
      </div>
      <div n="2" type="section">
        <head>§. 2.</head>
        <p>
          <ref target="#tempo-0000000597327698">
            If the <foreign xml:lang="it">Prestissimo</foreign> does not befit one immediately, nothing will happen to him if
            he plays the example a little bit slower. This is to be understood for students. To a want-to-be master, this
            freedom is not granted; he may have a look through the piece for some while. As soon as he starts playing however,
            this piece must go on as it should, i.e. very rapidly.
          </ref>
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="3" type="section">
        <head>§. 3.</head>
        <p>
          I cannot leave unmentioned here, what <persName ref="https://d-nb.info/gnd/1050676637">St. Lambert</persName> is saying about velocity for slow minds in his
          <bibl xml:lang="fra"><hi rendition="#aq">Traité d'accompagnement p. 58.</hi></bibl>:
          When a measure appears so strong that the thorough bass player does not find the comfort to play
            all the notes, he might be satisfied with striking only the first note on every beat of the measure and
            leaves it to the bass viols to play everything. It is simplier since one does not have to play anything
            more. The rapid passages and progressions do not suit to the instruments on which the thorough-bass is played.
            If one wants to play them on the keyboard he may only play the principal notes, which are the ones on the
            down- and upbeat of the measure.

          I have to confess, I like that invention and it is very easy-going. Soon it will result in what <persName ref="https://d-nb.info/gnd/118567934">Kuhnau</persName> describes
          in his Quacksalber p. 23,<note type="footnote">Johann Kuhnau, Der musicalische Quack-Salber, Dresden 1700</note>
          where <persName type="fictional">Signor Carassa</persName> takes snuff with the left hand, as soon as rapid notes appear in the bass.
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="4" type="section">
        <head>§. 4.</head>
        <p>
          It should be known, that all the beauty of this instruction is found, when someone plays note for note with the
          right hand - be it in thirds (which is most common), or in sixths and fourths just as the harmony requires it, in such a way, that
          it continuously proceeds, as if both hands played the same, although they do very different things. I will anatomize a few bars
          For those who do not really get it: For the
          <ref target="#note-0000001151019300 #note-0000000728183165 #note-0000000661420319 #note-0000001563263532 #note-0000000135874834">first five notes</ref>
          thirds are required;
          <ref target="#note-0000000879171957">for the sixth note a fourth</ref>;
          <ref target="#note-0000000137581922">for the seventh note a thirds</ref>;
          <ref target="#note-0000000169506056">and for the eigth a fourth</ref>;
          <ref target="#note-0000001593290185">the ninth note has a third</ref>;
          <ref target="#note-0000001842869945">and the tenth has a fourth</ref>;
          then <ref target="#note-0000001417398906 #note-0000001546534372 #note-0000001950454433 #note-0000000180140992 #note-0000001428036512 #note-0000002138412945">six thirds</ref>
          are following and so on.

          In the first bar of the second section the <ref target="#note-0000000010437039 #note-0000000332742016 #note-0000000739671699 #note-0000001985974457">four first notes have thirds</ref>,
          <ref target="#note-0000002123645856">the fifth has a major fourth; (which is expressed by a 6⃥ on the F#)</ref>
          <ref target="#note-0000002123645856 #note-0000000320308350 #note-0000002118394396 #note-0000001375139203">the four following notes need thirds</ref>,
          and <ref target="#note-0000001990298838">where the seventh is figured a third is played on the first note</ref>;
          <ref target="#note-0000001195728701">on the second one a sixth; (which is the 7 of the f-sharp)</ref>
          <ref target="#note-0000000441867231">and for the third note a sixth in downward motion</ref>.

          In that way everything else has to be played.
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="5" type="section">
        <head>§. 5.</head>
        <p>
          I took the freedom here to deviate from the norm and write a cadence on
          <ref target="#note-0000000847506698 #note-0000000488499091">the second scale degree</ref> because I finally
          do not want to decline the fashion, since it usually is something rare for me to admit strange pleasantries.
          Now and then one can do it, but I do not want to make it a craft. In the major keys it is still rather natural to
          end on the second scale degree. The minor keys prefer to finish on the seventh scale degree.
        </p>
      </div>
    </body>
  </text>
</TEI>
