<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
  <teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
      <titleStmt>
        <title>Mattheson: Der Ober-Classe Drittes Probstück</title>
      </titleStmt>
      <publicationStmt>
        <p>Niels Pfeffer</p>
      </publicationStmt>
      <sourceDesc>
        <p>Mattheson.</p>
      </sourceDesc>
    </fileDesc>
  </teiHeader>
  <text>
    <body>
      <head>Erläuterung</head>
      <div n="1" type="section">
        <head>§ 1.</head>
        <p>
          There it is easy to play thorough bass, when no more figures come up than in this example. Alas! how happy some will
          be, that there are so few figures here. To admit the truth, now and then I have to allow people to take breath – otherwise
          it would turn too sour for them. It could be, however, that in consideration of the supposed advantage,  since we do not
          anymore accept any apprentices in this class, but only seniors, one or the other signature is not written so precisely,
          but left out on porpose: so that a player sharpens his own judgement and learns to walk without a stick.
        </p>
      </div>
      <div n="2" type="section">
        <head>§ 2.</head>
        <p>
          <ref target="tempo-0000000597327698">
            If the <foreign xml:lang="it">Prestissimo</foreign> does not suit someone immediately, nothing will happen to him, if 
            he plays the example a little bit slower. This is to be understood for students. To a want-to-be master, this 
            freedom is not granted; he may have a look through the piece for some while. As soon as he starts playing however, 
            this piece must go on as it should, i.e. very rapidly.
          </ref>
        </p>
      </div>
      
      <div n="3" type="section">
        <head>§ 3.</head>
        <p>
          I cannot leave unmentioned here, what St. Lambert is saying about velocity for slow minds in his
          <foreign lang="fr">Traité d'accompagnement p. 58</foreign>
           Ich will die Worte immer verteutschen: <q>Wenn ein so geschwinder Tact vorkömmt, (es wird aber nur von dem
          Drey-Viertel-Tact geredet) daß der General-Bassiste die Bequemlichkeit nicht findet, alle und jede
          Noten zz spielen, kann er damit schon vergnüget seyn, wenn er nur die erste Note in jeder Abtheilung
          des Tacts anschlägt, und den Baß-Geigen die andern zu spielen überläßt: denn es fällt denselben viel leichter, 
          weil man auf ihnen weiter nichts dazu greiffen darff. Die gar hurtigen Gänge und Läuffe schicken sich nicht
          zu den Instrumenten, darauf der General-Baß gespielet wird: dahero denn, wenn dergleichen Geschwindigkeiten
          aufstossen, die andern Instrumente solche allein spielen mögen, oder falls man sie auf dem Clavier mit hören
          lassen will, dürffen nur die Hauptnoten davon angeschlagen werden, nehmlich diejenigen, welche etwa in den Nieder- und
          Aufschlag des Tacts fallen.</q>
          
          I have to confess, I like that that invention and it is very leisurely. Soon it will come out as Kuhnau describes 
          in his Quacksalber p. 23, where Signor Caraffa takes snuff with the left hand, as soon as quick notes appear in the bass.
        </p>
      </div> 
      
      <div n="4" type="section">
        <head>§ 4.</head>
        <p>
          It should be known, that all the beauty of this instruction is to be found, when someone plays note for note with the 
          right hand - be it in thirds (which is most common), or in sixths and fourths, if the harmony requires it, in a way, that 
          it continuously goes on, as if both hands played the same, although it are very different things. I will anatomize a few bars
          For those who do not really get it: For the 
          <ref target="beam-0000001219411201">first five notes</ref>
          <ref target="beam-0000000674664761">thirds are required</ref>;
          <ref target="note-0000000879171957">for the sixth note a fourth</ref>;
          <ref target="note-0000000137581922">for the seventh note a thirds</ref>;
          <ref target="note-0000000169506056">and for the eigth a fourth</ref>;
          <ref target="note-0000001593290185">the ninth note has a third</ref>;
          <ref target="note-0000001842869945">and the tenth has a fourth</ref>;
          then <ref target="beam-0000001732974875">six thirds</ref>
          <ref target="beam-0000001699357564">are following</ref> and so on.
          
          In the first bar of the second section <ref target="beam-0000001100009716">for first notes </ref>
          <ref target="note-0000000430496844">have thirds</ref>,
          <ref target="note-0000002123645856">the fifth has a major fourth; (which is expressed 6⃥ on the f-sharp)</ref>
          <ref target="note-0000000320308350">the four</ref><ref target="beam-0000001939170793"> following notes need thirds</ref>,
          and <ref target="note-0000001990298838">where the seventh is figured a third is played on the first note</ref>; 
          <ref target="note-0000001195728701">on the second one a sixth; (which is the 7 of the f-sharp)</ref> 
          <ref target="note-0000000441867231">and for the third note a sixth in downward motion</ref>.
          
          In that way everything else has to be played.
        </p>
      </div>
      
      <div n="5" type="section">
        <head>§ 5.</head>
        <p>
          The freedom I took here, to depart from the norm and write a cadence on 
          <ref target="layer-0000000729069026">the second scale degree</ref> stems from this, that I finally 
          do not want to decline the fashion, since it usually is something rare for me, to admit strange pleasantries.
          Now and then one can do it, but I do not want to make it a craft. In the major keys it is still rather natural to 
          end on the second scale degree. The minor keys prefer to end on the seventh scale degree.
        </p>
      </div>
    </body>
  </text>
</TEI>
