<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
  <teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
      <titleStmt>
        <title>Mattheson: Der Ober-Classe Erstes Probstück</title>
      </titleStmt>
      <publicationStmt>
        <p>Niels Pfeffer</p>
      </publicationStmt>
      <sourceDesc>
        <p>Mattheson.</p>
      </sourceDesc>
    </fileDesc>
  </teiHeader>
  <text>
    <body>
      <div n="0" type="chapter">
      <head>Annotations</head>
      <div n="1" type="section">
        <head>§ 1.</head>
        <p>
          A pastor wanted to compare the miserable days of the human life with something and said:
          They were like a musical book, in which generally more black that white notes are found; his opinion was, that
          to the same degree one encounters more misfortune than fortune. Now, it will be left open if the comparison lags.
          However, if the black color signifies an image of misery, one should rather choose a church or another clerical
          assembly than a music book; since there are more black than white clothes to be found. I say it so that nobody thinks,
          he will be led into the fear- or cross school, because of the slightly black notes in that class. Not at all, nobody
          may be afraid: for our notes are characteristics of a cheerful temper, a swift mind and of a happy heart. Have courage,
          that is the best advice.
        </p>
      </div>
      <div n="2" type="section">
        <head>§ 2.</head>
        <p>
          The eighth notes or plain notes in the <ref target="m-503">sixteenth</ref>, <ref target="m-550">seventeenth</ref> and
          <ref target="m-605">eighteenth</ref> measure indicate by themselves, that something varying might be added with the right
          hand. How exactly it should be done, has to be taken from the previous music: since this work is disposed in a way, that
          everything in a piece has been there already or it will appear soon, when something extrodinary has to be done. Thus, everything
          is connected so naturally and differs so little from the theme, that it is rather easy to find the right opinion. In order
          not to be accused once more of giving riddles, this little should be an instruction for further reflection:
          
          <notatedMusic>
            <ptr target="music-example1.mei" />
          </notatedMusic>
          
          It hopefully has been said often enough that the left hand has to play the figures and chords when playing this ornamentation.
          Often I would have liked to just put the bass as it should be, if the notes could be printed as intertwined as they can be written
          down or stinged in copper.
        </p>
      </div>
      
      <div n="3" type="section">
        <head>§ 3.</head>
        <p>
          In the <ref target="m-781">23rd measure</ref> occurs another instance, so that the previous can be taken for advice. 
          In the <ref target="m-802">24th measure</ref> thirds can be played, together with a full-voice texture.
          In the <ref target="m-863">25th measure</ref> it is done as previously.
          The <ref target="m-997">29th</ref>, <ref target="m-1027">30th</ref> and <ref target="m-1069">31st measure</ref> allow a 
          changing, since the right hand imitates the left hand and modulates in quarter notes according to the theme. Whomever it seems obscure should
          look at this line:<note type="footnote">Here Mattheson mistakenly shifted the bar line for a quarter note.</note>
          <notatedMusic>
            <ptr target="music-example2.mei" />
          </notatedMusic>
        </p>
      </div> 
      
      <div n="4" type="section">
        <head>§ 4.</head>
        <p>
          In the <ref target="m-1123">33rd measure</ref> it might not sound bad, when, together with the chords
          and sixths and fifths, somewhat more is played, in about the following manner:<note type="footnote">Compared to the original, Mattheson
          modified the rhythmic motive in the left hand.</note>
          <notatedMusic>
            <ptr target="music-example3.mei" />
          </notatedMusic>
        </p>
        <p>
          Besides I would not know what to remind or make easier in this piece. 
        </p>
      </div>
    </div>
    </body>
  </text>
</TEI>
