<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
  <teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
      <titleStmt>
        <title type="part">Lesson by R. Hill on Probstück 3</title>
        <author>
          <persName>
            <surname>Hill</surname>
            <forename>Robert</forename>
          </persName>
        </author>
        <editor>
          <persName>
            <surname>Niels</surname>
            <forename>Pfeffer</forename>
          </persName>
        </editor>
      </titleStmt>
      <publicationStmt>
        <publisher>
          <persName>
            <surname>Niels</surname>
            <forename>Pfeffer</forename>
          </persName>
        </publisher>
      </publicationStmt>
      <sourceDesc>
        <recordingStmt>
          <recording type="audio">
            <respStmt>
              <resp>Teacher</resp>
              <name>Robert Hill</name>

              <resp>Student</resp>
              <name>Niels Pfeffer</name>
            </respStmt>
          </recording>
        </recordingStmt>
      </sourceDesc>
    </fileDesc>
  </teiHeader>
  <text>
    <body>
      <title>Lesson on Prob-Stück 3</title>
      given by Robert Hill, MH Freiburg, 05/17/2019

      <p>
        [The student plays:]
      </p>
      <notatedMusic>
        <ptr target="beginning1.mei" />
      </notatedMusic>

      <p>
        <foreign xml:lang="de">R.H. Mein persönlicher Geschmack geht dahin,
        etwas mehr auf die drei zu spielen, sodass ein trochäischer
        Rhythmus — ◡ entsteht. Es gibt  zwar kaum Situationen, in denen
        etwas wichtiges auf der 3 vorkommt. Aber auf der anderen Seite ändert
        sich die Figur selbst eben auf der dritten Zählzeit.</foreign>
      </p>

      <p>
        I think that
        <ref target="#m-62">in the beginning</ref>
        and in places that are like the beginning,
        you should think of the right hand as the main hand and not as somehow
        a harmonic accompaniment of the left hand. So I would change register
        more in the right hand from the first beat to the third beat so that it
        has more of a shape. Right now it is just an accompaniment. Something
        like that:
      </p>

      <notatedMusic>
        <ptr target="beginning2.mei" />
      </notatedMusic>

      <p>
        And then a real contrast
        <ref target="#m-420">in the middle section</ref>, when you have the other
        figuration – maybe even on the upper manual, so that it sounds like a concerto
        structure.
      </p>

      <p>
        If you are thinking of the upper part as more somehow representing what
        an orchestra would do and the actual figuration that is written is more
        a kind of, you could say textual embellishment of a transcription of an
        orchestral concerto, why don’t we take that idea one step further?
      </p>

      <notatedMusic>
        <ptr target="beginning3.mei"></ptr>
      </notatedMusic>

      <p>
        And then in <ref target="#m-523">bar 14</ref> actually all three are
        accented, but they aren’t equal.
      </p>

      <notatedMusic>
        <ptr target="middle-section1.mei"></ptr>
      </notatedMusic>

      <p>
        And then something more like a two-voice texture.
      </p>

      <notatedMusic>
        <ptr target="middle-section2.mei"></ptr>
      </notatedMusic>
    </body>
  </text>
</TEI>
