<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
  <teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
      <titleStmt>
        <title type="part">Mattheson: Der Ober-Classe Erstes Probstu&#x0364;ck</title>
      </titleStmt>
      <publicationStmt>
        <p>Niels Pfeffer</p>
      </publicationStmt>
      <sourceDesc>
        <p>Mattheson.</p>
      </sourceDesc>
    </fileDesc>
  </teiHeader>
  <text>
    <body>
      <div n="0" type="chapter">
      <head>Annotations</head>
      <div n="1" type="section">
        <head>§. 1.</head>
        <p xml:id="p1-1">
          This test piece can be used as a Toccata or at least as a good Toccatina. In the first measure both <ref target="#m-81">quavers</ref>
          and <ref target="#m-83">their breaks</ref> make known, that one can repeat in the discant what has been already before in the bass.
          In the <ref target="#m-87">second</ref>, <ref target="#m-226">fifth</ref>, <ref target="#m-377">eighth</ref>,
          <ref target="#m-729">16th</ref>,
          <ref target="#m-781">17th</ref>,
          <ref target="#m-841">18th</ref>,
          <ref target="#m-964">21st</ref> and <ref target="#m-1277">29th</ref> measure it is the same case and one only has to see what has been before
          in the bass or what is following and then he has found what the right hand can play, if one wants to be heard with that.


        </p>
      </div>
      <div n="2" type="section">
        <head>§. 2.</head>
        <p xml:id="p2-1">
          Whenever there are figures such as in the <ref target="#m-192">fourth measure</ref>, one always goes along in leaps in the right hand according
          to the chord, starting from the third. In the <ref target="#m-269">sixth measure</ref> it should be noticed that
          figuration on p. 307<note type="editorial">See the annotations of Probstu&#x0364;ck 1, last example.</note> with
          sixths in the right hand can be used here in the following way:
        </p>
        <notatedMusic xml:id="music-example1">
          <ptr target="music-example1.mei" />
        </notatedMusic>
        <p xml:id="p2-2">
          This way of syncopating is very easy and makes a great effect, as if it was fair: that is why one can make use of it many times,
          with peculiar advantage and little effort.
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="3" type="section">
        <head>§. 3.</head>
        <p xml:id="p3-1">
          There is a similiar occasion in the <ref target="#m-433">ninth measure</ref>, where the same figuration can be used again.
          Where the <ref target="#clef-001">low discant clef</ref> occurs and further <ref target="#m-1267">where the bass starts the same motive
          transposed to G</ref> one proceeds in the same way.
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="4" type="section">
        <head>§. 4.</head>
        <p xml:id="p4-1">
          <ref target="#m-635">In the beginning of the second part of this test piece, after the fermata</ref>,
          one arpeggiates the chords and the figures placed above in a modest, or slow and staid manner, just with sixteenth notes, and proceeds
          for three measures that way. Should I reveal my opinion more clearly with notes?
        </p>
        <notatedMusic xml:id="music-example2">
          <ptr target="music-example2.mei" />
        </notatedMusic>
      </div>

      <div n="5" type="section">
        <head>§. 5.</head>
        <p xml:id="p5-1">
          Just as one mainly has to observe the already mentioned quavers for its position of the main motive in the upper voice, it seems
          in the same way to be necessary to do a little reminder of that in the following 16th, 17th and 18th measure. The motive occurs three times:
          the first starting on f, the other follows immediately with b,
          and the third begins, when the bass has finished, with a g. For my terms, this can be called
          sufficently clearly instructed.
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="6" type="section">
        <head>§. 6.</head>
        <p xml:id="p6-1">
          Regarding the quavers in the <ref target="#m-1051">23nd</ref> to the <ref target="#m-1212">26th measure</ref>,
          one can easily guess, that in such a colorful way of playing, one cannot be idle there. However there are plenty of variations and
          arpeggiations to be mentioned, which all to record one would need an additional volume. It can be of great use,
          if one wants to practise them in the following manner. Since these exercises are not only put together rather colourfully themselves,
          but are including common lessons that one has to learn to apply in all kinds of different cases:
        </p>
        <notatedMusic xml:id="music-example3">
          <ptr target="music-example3.mei" />
        </notatedMusic>
      </div>

      <div n="7" type="section">
        <head>§. 7.</head>
        <p xml:id="p7-1">
          In the <ref target="#m-1382">last half of the 30th bar</ref><note type="footnote">Mattheson probably meant measure 31.</note>
          the right hand can follow in sixths, just as in the <ref target="#m-1440">first half of the following 31st bar.</ref><note type="footnote">32nd accordingly.</note>.
          The <ref target="#m-1459">last half of the same measure</ref> however is to be played in octaves in both hands and then alternates with
          sixths and octaves until the <ref target="#m-1609">three last measures</ref>, which all can be played in octaves.

          I can already see in advance, that some particularly old and stubborn ones will strongly shake about those octaves, for they think that this
          way of playing is completly against the etiquette. They can think whatever they want; if only they believe, that I am concerned about nothing
          more than a good effect in playing and accompanying, and that I experienced not through meditation but through long former
          exercise, how good such octaves fall into the ear, especially in powerful pieces. However, I also found, that to many, who were not used to it, although
          they were quite capable on the keyboard, it appeared Spanish to do the same thing in both hands, and they were stumbling quite a bit;
          For my terms this requires not little exercise, if one wants to play everything cleanly in this manner in fast notes.
          Sometimes the bass figurations of arias tolerate this quite well, sometimes not at all. But this can never be placed when only one voice
          should stand out, which a bright one can guess easily, and he can take this test piece as an example.
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="8" type="section">
        <head>§. 8.</head>
        <p xml:id="p8-1">
          I have drafted this example quite conveniently on two little quarto leaves facing each other, not considering, that it might take twice as much space
          in print and that it causes the behated trouble of turning pages in quick runs. However one can see, that there was no other way to
          deal with the printed notes, since the demisemiquavers take so much space below them, that sometimes just a half bar fits in one line.
          I lament the ugly shape of the notes a lot, since they do not only appear inapt, but they also cause that one has to interrupt what otherwise
          belongs together due to turning the page. This caused me to patch in a little in the end on p. 309<note type="footnote">b. 19</note>
          by doing <ref target="#m-914">a cadence</ref> and <ref target="#m-915">a break</ref> that otherwise would not have come to my mind.
          A reasonable person will easily perceive it and will excuse me. I did my best.
        </p>
      </div>
    </div>

    <note type="on-key-signature">
      Johann Mattheson, <hi rendition="#i">Das Neu-ero&#x0364;ffnete Orchester</hi>, Hamburg 1713: "ist fast der allerscho&#x0364;neste Tohn / weil er nicht nur die den [dem] vorigen [d-moll] anha&#x0364;ngende ziemliche Ernsthafftigkeit mit einer muntern Lieblichkeit vermischet / sondern eine ungemeine Anmuth und Gefa&#x0364;lligkeit mit sich fu&#x0364;hret / dadurch er wol zu za&#x0364;rtlichen / als erquickenden / so wol zu sehnenden als vergnu&#x0364;gten; mit kurtzen beydes zu ma&#x0364;ßigen Klagen und TEMPERIrter [maßvoller] Fro&#x0364;lichkeit bequem und u&#x0364;beraus FLEXIBLE ist. [S. 238] KIRCHERUS urtheilet also davon: [...] "Er fu&#x0364;hre eine zu&#x0364;chtige und anda&#x0364;chtige Freudigkeit bey sich / sey fro&#x0364;lich und voller ernsthafften Spru&#x0364;nge."
    </note>

    <note type="on-meter">
      Johann Mattheson, <hi rendition="#i">Das Neu-ero&#x0364;ffnete Orchester</hi>, Hamburg 1713, S. 79: C. Bedeutet,
      daß die Mensur 4. <hi rendition="#aq"><foreign xml:lang="lat">Subdivisiones</foreign></hi> und vier viertel habe, deren zwey im Nieder- und zwey im Aufschlage gehen.
      Ihr gebrauch ist groß in Arien, Allemanden, Bouréen etc. und fast durchgehends die gewo&#x0364;hnliche, deswegen sie auch der schlechte Tact genannt wird.
    </note>

    </body>
  </text>
</TEI>
