<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
  <teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
      <titleStmt>
        <title type="part">Mattheson: Der Ober-Classe Zehntes Probstück</title>
      </titleStmt>
      <publicationStmt>
        <p>Niels Pfeffer</p>
      </publicationStmt>
      <sourceDesc>
        <p>Mattheson.</p>
      </sourceDesc>
    </fileDesc>
  </teiHeader>
  <text>
    <body>
      <div n="0" type="chapter">
      <head>Annotations</head>
      <div n="1" type="section">
        <head>§. 1.</head>
        <p xml:id="p1-1">
          <ref target="m-35">One</ref> <ref target="m-57">plays</ref>
          <ref target="m-80">the</ref> <ref target="m-105">first</ref>
          <ref target="m-128">line</ref> of this piece only with octaves in the bass and resolves the
          <ref target="fb-1">seventh</ref> a little more delicately than usual.
          Two measures later, in the second line, <ref target="m-190">the main subject occurs
          again</ref>, but changed, with nothing more to be observed. In the <ref target="m-383">seventeenth measure</ref> one
          shall be beware of the scale beginning in that very place and firmly impress it for the right hand will use it afterwards.
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="2" type="section">
        <head>§. 2.</head>
        <p xml:id="p2-1">
          In the <ref target="m-478">21st measure</ref> the main subject comes again in the repercussion of the fifth,
          with again nothing colourful required if played nice and purely. Then one has to place the above mentioned scale in
          the <ref target="m-589">26th measure</ref> in the right hand right away with the seventh in the fifth and has to continue
          that way for three measures with a full-voiced bass. From measure <ref target="m-662">29</ref> to <ref target="m-736">32</ref>
          it is played as strong and on each note as full-voiced as possible. It cannot harm to use rapid arpeggiations
          with both hands at that place.
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="3" type="section">
        <head>§. 3.</head>
        <p xml:id="p3-1">
          In the <ref target="m-758">33rd measure</ref> a new invention begins which requires that the right hand follows
          the left hand note for note when it is three steps in advance: and that way it goes on
          up to the <ref target="m-890">37rd measure</ref>
          where the figuration that has already been in
          <ref target="m-297">the 13th measure</ref> can be used as an interlude again,
          placed in a fourth.
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="4" type="section">
        <head>§. 4.</head>
        <p xml:id="p4-1">
          Four measures later the bass takes up again the previously mentioned scale in transposition, which should be
          remembered the same way since afterwardfs it will be used again in the right hand. In the <ref target="m-1131">46th measure</ref>
          one sees the first theme changed in a second way, where it has to be observed, that the seventh and its resolution can
          be changed and arpeggiated in the same way, as can be seen from the following example:
          <notatedMusic xml:id="music-example1">
            <ptr target="music-example1.mei" />
          </notatedMusic>
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="5" type="section">
        <head>§. 5.</head>
        <p>
          Afterwards the often-mentioned scale comes in the right hand on the <ref target="m-1287">C</ref> in the fifth
          and continues to the fourth measure, but, as always, with full-voiced chords in the bass.
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="6" type="section">
        <head>§. 6.</head>
        <p xml:id="p6-1">
          For the final follows what has been already in the measures <ref target="m-662">29</ref>–<ref target="m-736">32</ref> and
          it is played with all forces as full-voiced as possible, also with arpeggiations in both hands.
          Concerning the actual use of this arpeggiation, considering that it makes a big noise and is the most pervasive way
          of playing on the keyboard, it must be used nowhere else but in full-voiced pieces such as strong concerti, ouvertures,
          symphonies and choirs, especially there, where a <foreign>forte</foreign> and <foreign>tutti</foreign> is placed;
          otherwise it would drown and ruin everything too easily. This aria can be used as something of foreign hand.
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="7" type="section">
        <!--
        <head>ARIA del <hi rendition="#i">Signore Marcello</hi>, Nobile Veneto.</head>
        -->
        <notatedMusic xml:id="aria-marcello">
          <ptr target="aria-marcello.mei" />
        </notatedMusic>
        <p xml:id="p7-1">
          I placed this rather neat aria here for different reasons: (1) so that
          one solmisizes it; (2) since ♭D, ♭G, ♭C and ♭F appear often in it,
          (3) since the last section has modulations and cadences in both,
          D-sharp minor and G-sharp minor. (4) since in demands a great master
          to accompany this aria well without figures:
          for nobody will do justice to the
          <ref target="measure-0000001827916444">seventh</ref>,
          <ref target="measure-0000001219466359">eighth</ref>,
          <ref target="measure-0000001708734092">ninth</ref>
          and <ref target="measure-0000000917306217">tenth measure</ref>,
          who does not see from the
          <ref target="measure-0000000173914305">63th</ref> measure and following
          how to treat them correctly; and (5) because in
          <ref target="staff-0000000093433268">the second measure in the second line
            of the previous page in the singing voice</ref>
          and also in the 13th measure of the last part, for the first time on
          <ref target="measure-0000002110501254">page 358 in the penultimate measure</ref> on the
          <ref target="verse-0000000479962947">syllable -ne</ref> and for the second time on
          <ref target="measure-0000001850066416">page 359 in the second measure</ref>
          on <ref target="verse-0000000656479847">the syllable -ven</ref>,
          appears in interval that cannot be counted among the so-called common ones
          but still indicated how a skilled master might make use of it. It is
          a minor ninth in relation to the fundamental voice, and I do not hesitate
          to admit that is it the first which then I found in a melody in that way
          and considered useful.
          Likewise, the
          <ref target="measure-0000001424025321">cadence of the first section</ref>
          on the <ref target="note-0000000527129810">seventh</ref> scale degree is something strange, nothing ordinary.
          But I cannot really say that it delights may, especially considering
          the repetition: but everybody has his own taste.
        </p>
      </div>

      <note type="on-key-signature">
        F minor (the tenth) seems to present a <hi rendition="#b">delicate</hi> and <hi rendition="#b">serene</hi>,
        yet <hi rendition="#b">deep</hi> and <hi rendition="#b">heavy anguish, associated with some despair</hi>,
        and is exceedingly <hi rendition="#b">moveable</hi>. It nicely expresses black and
        helpless melancoly and sometimes causes horror and shiver to the listener.
        (Someone shall indicate me <foreign>ex antiquorum silentio</foreign> what
        what sort of mode this is and of which nature it is?)
      </note>

      <note type="on-meter">
        6/8 is like 6/4, just diminuished. Its use is in modern compositions almost
        the most beautiful and suits for all sort of coulante, melodious and also
        brisk and swift things rather well.
      </note>
    </div>
    </body>
  </text>
</TEI>
