<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
  <teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
      <titleStmt>
        <title>Mattheson: Der Ober-Classe Neuntes Probstück</title>
      </titleStmt>
      <publicationStmt>
        <p>Niels Pfeffer</p>
      </publicationStmt>
      <sourceDesc>
        <p>Mattheson.</p>
      </sourceDesc>
    </fileDesc>
  </teiHeader>
  <text>
    <body>
      <div n="0" type="chapter">
      <head>Annotations</head>
      <div n="1" type="section">
        <head>§ 1.</head>
        <p id="p1-1">
          Various things will need to be reminded of, if one wants to play the thing according to the author's liking.
          This – it shall be said once again – necessarily has to happen, if anything should be brought to perfection. Somebody who does not
          catch or divine the author's intention, misses it by far, even if he thinks to have found it.
          When having played the cadence in the <ref target="m-210">seventh measure</ref>, the right hand has to play right away something more
          than the bald chords and sixths, for this can be done by the left hand alone.
          No counter-melody can now be found but the one in the <ref target="m-640">20th measure</ref>,
          which has to be taken here and begins on the <emph>c</emph> with the third,
          and will be repeated four times, always one tone higher. One can easily conclude that afterwards,
          <ref target="m-402">in measure 13</ref> the same is required once more, however, not with the third, but starting
          with the octave on the <emph>g</emph> the progression is repeated four times, always one tone higher, just as before.
          In <ref target="m-640">measure 20</ref> the previous counter-melody shows up in the bass, so the thing can be
          turned around and the melody that was before in the bass can now be used in the discant while still playing
          full-voiced chords. When it appears in the last half of the <ref target="m-701">22nd measure</ref>, where three crotchets
          are, one does well to play a scale down from C3 to D2 for an imitation; but not forgetting the 6 and 5 in the bass. 
          The <ref target="m-781">24th measure</ref> alternates again the motives and in the <ref target="m-1014">32rd</ref>
          one may play scales in thirds, and where three crotchets, one plays the just mentioned imitation clause.
          I am afraid that the musical lawmakers will throw a lawsuit at me for using the C3 in thorough bass.
          But my defension in already done.
        </p>
      </div>
      <div n="2" type="section">
        <head>§ 2.</head>
        <p id="p2-1">
          The <ref target="m-1187">37th measure</ref> and the following ones need a certain kind of arpeggiation
          while playing exactly the figures placed above. Since it might be hard to guess I will write down a bit of it for the beginners:
          <notatedMusic id="music-example1">
            <ptr target="music-example1.mei" />
          </notatedMusic>
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="3" type="section">
        <head>§ 3.</head>
        <p id="p3-1">
          Now this might be enough of instruction, everything else can naturally be conceived through it.
          However, in order not to be once again accused of demanding unwritten things to be played and the hangman
          (for he is an experienced fellow) has to guess what I want to have, I will write down some more measures.
          <notatedMusic id="music-example2">
            <ptr target="music-example2.mei" />
          </notatedMusic>
        </p>
        <p id="p3-2">
          And this shall be enough for those who do not know at all how to help themselves.
          Those who want to stand for something and want to be of significance, must immediately bring out such
          things even finer
          and more elaborate than instructed here; otherwise they are, though not particularly bunglers, yet quite
          mediocre. I very much like that St. Lambert even approves to imitate the subjects or fugues
          of the arias in all parts on the keyboard when accompanying a single voice. His words are:
          <q>When one plays the thorough-bass for one single voice and a munter and lively arias comes up
            in which multiple imitations occur as they often are found in Italian pieces, one can imitate
            the subject and the fugues of the aria on his keyboard and play the voices, one after the other, too.
            But it requires a complete knowledge and it has to be a first-grade master who easily wants to play it.</q>
          For that, our test pieces can be taken as an example. I would like there more to be of first grade in this
          world, there are too little of them. Those of last grade pretend to be the master all the time.
        </p>
      </div> 

      <div n="4" type="section">
        <head>§ 4.</head>
        <p id="p4-1">
          The three following bars are done simply with thirds, which sufficently fills in an Allegro,
          and finally the two measures before the last one with the counter subject and full-voiced bass
          until the end.
        </p>
      </div>
    </div>
    </body>
  </text>
</TEI>
