<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
  <teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
      <titleStmt>
        <title type="part">Mattheson: Der Ober-Classe Elfftes Probstück</title>
      </titleStmt>
      <publicationStmt>
        <p>Niels Pfeffer</p>
      </publicationStmt>
      <sourceDesc>
        <p>Mattheson.</p>
      </sourceDesc>
    </fileDesc>
  </teiHeader>
  <text>
    <body>
      <div n="0" type="chapter">
      <head>Annotations</head>
      <div n="1" type="section">
        <head>§. 1.</head>
        <p xml:id="p1-1">
          How does the organist feel? It appears somewhat colourful here again; but it does not
          mean as much as one thinks. The thing can be done if only one oversees it right.
          Everything falls so nicely into the hand that it is a pure pleasure.
          Have courage: only who risks, does win. It is for a test. The key is known,
          the time is in three crotchets and there are no more clefs than bass, tenor and alto.
          Why should one be afraid? Yes, I remember, the gentleman does not like to play
          from printed scores. It is true if you are not used to it. Also, the paper
          seems to shine through. He shall take it home and have it copied, the thing deserves
          it. It is done by someone of whom the gentleman has heard that he can and wants
          to compose. Tomorrow we come together again.
        </p>
      </div>
      <div n="2" type="section">
        <head>§. 2.</head>
        <p xml:id="p2-1">
          I, or someone else, would need to talk like that with an unmusical organist.
          For another honest gentleman it could be of use to know, that one would like to have
          both hands playing the first three bars in thirds and sometimes
          – when required by the harmony – in fourths, from which it will be self-explanatory
          where to add a sixth or a 6/4. Our intention in the measures
          <ref target="#measure-0000000448770319">four </ref>
          <ref target="#measure-0000001465389423">to</ref>
          <ref target="#measure-0000001029700479">six</ref>
          is, that the chords and figures remain in the left hand while the right hand
          modulates a little, about in the following way:
        </p>
        <notatedMusic xml:id="music-example1">
          <ptr target="music-example1.mei" />
        </notatedMusic>
        <p xml:id="p2-2">
          And like that in the
          <ref target="#measure-0000002075207242">first</ref> and
          <ref target="#measure-0000000341090212">second</ref>,
          and the same in the
          <ref target="#measure-0000000290191869">18th</ref>,
          <ref target="#measure-0000000649061137">19th</ref> and
          <ref target="#measure-0000001096465435">20th measure</ref> of the second section.
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="3" type="section">
        <head>§. 3.</head>
        <p xml:id="p3-1">
          The <ref target="#measure-0000001397371739">seventh</ref>,
          <ref target="#measure-0000001702882132">eighth</ref> and
          <ref target="#measure-0000001625398241">ninth measure</ref> have their indicated
          ways. But the
          <ref target="#measure-0000000189423239">tenth</ref>,
          <ref target="#measure-0000001905140679">eleventh</ref> and
          <ref target="#measure-0000001136879783">twelfth</ref> comply with the beginning
          for it are the same notes. Until the the end of the first section nothing
          else is to be reminded of, except that the
          <ref target="#measure-0000001114523276">18th</ref> and
          <ref target="#measure-0000001049077025">19th measure</ref>
          are played with plain chords, with no embellishment at all.
          In the
          <ref target="#measure-0000002078803044">third</ref>,
          <ref target="#measure-0000001071915657">fourth</ref> and
          <ref target="#measure-0000001796957864">fifth measure</ref>
          of the second section it goes on in the way described first, with broken chords
          and harmonies. I will write down a few measures, from which the rest can
          be deduced according to the bass. This begins in the
          <ref target="#measure-0000002078803044">third measure</ref> of the second section.
        </p>
        <notatedMusic xml:id="music-example2">
          <ptr target="music-example2.mei" />
        </notatedMusic>
      </div>

      <div n="4" type="section">
        <head>§. 4.</head>
        <p xml:id="p4-2">
          The <ref target="#measure-0000000233971040">tenth measure of the last section</ref>
          needs an arpeggiation with the sixth and fifth in the right hand as the left
          hand has introduced previously. In the
          <ref target="#measure-0000000560025628">twelfth</ref> it occurs again.
          In the <ref target="#measure-0000000874590211">13th</ref> and
          <ref target="#measure-0000001812859867">14th</ref> too; but in that way:
        </p>
        <notatedMusic xml:id="music-example3">
          <ptr target="music-example3.mei" />
        </notatedMusic>
        <p xml:id="p4-2">
          This arpeggiation is one of the easiest that can be found.
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="5" type="section">
        <head>§. 5.</head>
        <p xml:id="p5-1">
          One can see that in the
          <ref target="#measure-0000000906228807">25th</ref> and
          <ref target="#measure-0000000083483295">26th measure</ref>
          it goes one the same way and that in the
          <ref target="#measure-0000000860603968">29th</ref> the first type occurs again.
          But the right hand can gracefully modulate from the
          <ref target="#measure-0000000919086642">34th</ref> until the
          <ref target="#measure-0000000608266780">38th</ref>
          while the left hand plays all the figures. It might look something like that:
        </p>
        <notatedMusic xml:id="music-example4">
          <ptr target="music-example4.mei" />
        </notatedMusic>
        <p xml:id="p5-2">
          Meanwhile all this shall serve less as an instruction but rather as an
          encouragement and example, so that it always turns out better and more pleasant.
        </p>
      </div>

      <note type="on-key-signature">

      </note>

      <note type="on-meter">

      </note>
    </div>
    </body>
  </text>
</TEI>
