<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
  <teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
      <titleStmt>
        <title>Mattheson: Der Ober-Classe Siebendes Probstück</title>
      </titleStmt>
      <publicationStmt>
        <p>Niels Pfeffer</p>
      </publicationStmt>
      <sourceDesc>
        <p>Mattheson.</p>
      </sourceDesc>
    </fileDesc>
  </teiHeader>
  <text>
    <body>
      <head>Erläuterung</head>
      <div n="1" type="section">
        <head>§ 1.</head>
        <p>
          It can be noted daily, that to a thorough-bass player no clef besides the high alto is as unfamiliar as
          the common alto clef. The cause stems from the fact, that when a boy has a skill in singing, there are 
          among fifty merely two who sing altus: since everybody yells in the tiresome discant.
          
          Under those circumstances he only gets to know his clef, and he does not let another one trouble him, except the bass clef. With
          that, all his wisdom on keyboard instruments is covered. Besides that, here in Germany we are digusted by the French 
          pieces, although we welcome in an accepted and imitating manner everything that seems and is called French, even stomping the beat.
          Every teacher considers his own births to be the best for teaching. However, I think, that he, even if he is composing 
          so elegantly and is imitating I-do-not-know-who, should always include the work of others, especially in teaching, and he 
          should be told: <q>Do not disrespect what others are doing and do not praise your own works</q>. 
          
          Anybody, who is a little bit well-versed in French pieces, will hardly find any difficulties in the clefs, since the changes of clefs 
          appear nowhere else more frequently, though the pieces are easy to be played (?). A boy or a lad who thinks
          to become an organist once, is ashamed when taking a fiddle in the hand, almost as if it was humiliating. If you take 
          this awe from your underling and from time to time let him play a middle voice or a <foreign>Braccio</foreign>, the clefs 
          will be better known to him. But enough for know, I just had to say, that this flaw caused me to use the common alto clef 
          here more often.
        </p>
      </div>
      <div n="2" type="section">
        <head>§ 2.</head>
        <p>
          <ref target="tempo-0000000597327698">
            If the <foreign xml:lang="it">Prestissimo</foreign> does not suit someone immediately, nothing will happen to him, if 
            he plays the example a little bit slower. This is to be understood for students. To a want-to-be master, this 
            freedom is not granted; he may have a look through the piece for some while. As soon as he starts playing however, 
            this piece must go on as it should, i.e. very rapidly.
          </ref>
        </p>
      </div>
      
      <div n="3" type="section">
        <head>§ 3.</head>
        <p>
          I cannot leave unmentioned here, what St. Lambert is saying about velocity for slow minds in his
          <foreign lang="fr">Traité d'accompagnement p. 58</foreign>
           Ich will die Worte immer verteutschen: <q>Wenn ein so geschwinder Tact vorkömmt, (es wird aber nur von dem
          Drey-Viertel-Tact geredet) daß der General-Bassiste die Bequemlichkeit nicht findet, alle und jede
          Noten zz spielen, kann er damit schon vergnüget seyn, wenn er nur die erste Note in jeder Abtheilung
          des Tacts anschlägt, und den Baß-Geigen die andern zu spielen überläßt: denn es fällt denselben viel leichter, 
          weil man auf ihnen weiter nichts dazu greiffen darff. Die gar hurtigen Gänge und Läuffe schicken sich nicht
          zu den Instrumenten, darauf der General-Baß gespielet wird: dahero denn, wenn dergleichen Geschwindigkeiten
          aufstossen, die andern Instrumente solche allein spielen mögen, oder falls man sie auf dem Clavier mit hören
          lassen will, dürffen nur die Hauptnoten davon angeschlagen werden, nehmlich diejenigen, welche etwa in den Nieder- und
          Aufschlag des Tacts fallen.</q>
          
          I have to confess, I like that that invention and it is very leisurely. Soon it will come out as Kuhnau describes 
          in his Quacksalber p. 23, where Signor Caraffa takes snuff with the left hand, as soon as quick notes appear in the bass.
        </p>
      </div> 
      
      <div n="4" type="section">
        <head>§ 4.</head>
        <p>
          It should be known, that all the beauty of this instruction is to be found, when someone plays note for note with the 
          right hand - be it in thirds (which is most common), or in sixths and fourths, if the harmony requires it, in a way, that 
          it continuously goes on, as if both hands played the same, although it are very different things. I will anatomize a few bars
          For those who do not really get it: For the 
          <ref target="beam-0000001219411201">first five notes</ref>
          <ref target="beam-0000000674664761">thirds are required</ref>;
          <ref target="note-0000000879171957">for the sixth note a fourth</ref>;
          <ref target="note-0000000137581922">for the seventh note a thirds</ref>;
          <ref target="note-0000000169506056">and for the eigth a fourth</ref>;
          <ref target="note-0000001593290185">the ninth note has a third</ref>;
          <ref target="note-0000001842869945">and the tenth has a fourth</ref>;
          then <ref target="beam-0000001732974875">six thirds</ref>
          <ref target="beam-0000001699357564">are following</ref> and so on.
          
          In the first bar of the second section <ref target="beam-0000001100009716">for first notes </ref>
          <ref target="note-0000000430496844">have thirds</ref>,
          <ref target="note-0000002123645856">the fifth has a major fourth; (which is expressed 6⃥ on the f-sharp)</ref>
          <ref target="note-0000000320308350">the four</ref><ref target="beam-0000001939170793"> following notes need thirds</ref>,
          and <ref target="note-0000001990298838">where the seventh is figured a third is played on the first note</ref>; 
          <ref target="note-0000001195728701">on the second one a sixth; (which is the 7 of the f-sharp)</ref> 
          <ref target="note-0000000441867231">and for the third note a sixth in downward motion</ref>.
          
          In that way everything else has to be played.
        </p>
      </div>
      
      <div n="5" type="section">
        <head>§ 5.</head>
        <p>
          The freedom I took here, to depart from the norm and write a cadence on 
          <ref target="layer-0000000729069026">the second scale degree</ref> stems from this, that I finally 
          do not want to decline the fashion, since it usually is something rare for me, to admit strange pleasantries.
          Now and then one can do it, but I do not want to make it a craft. In the major keys it is still rather natural to 
          end on the second scale degree. The minor keys prefer to end on the seventh scale degree.
        </p>
      </div>
    </body>
  </text>
</TEI>
