<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
  <teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
      <titleStmt>
        <title type="part">Mattheson: Der Ober-Classe Neuntes Probstück (english translation)</title>
      </titleStmt>
      <editionStmt>
        <edition>digital edition</edition>
        <respStmt xml:id="pfeffer">
          <resp>translated by </resp>
          <name>Niels Pfeffer</name>
        </respStmt>
      </editionStmt>
      <publicationStmt>
        <publisher>
          <persName>
            <surname>Niels</surname>
            <forename>Pfeffer</forename>
          </persName>
        </publisher>
        <availability>
          <licence target="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0">
            <p>Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License</p>
          </licence>
        </availability>
      </publicationStmt>
      <sourceDesc>
        <p>Mattheson.</p>
      </sourceDesc>
    </fileDesc>
  </teiHeader>
  <text>
    <body>
      <div n="0" type="chapter">
      <head>Annotations</head>
      <div n="1" type="section">
        <head>§. 1.</head>
        <p xml:id="p1-1">
          Various things will need to be noted if one wants to play the thing according to the author's liking.
          This – it should be said once again – necessarily has to happen, if anything should be brought to perfection. Somebody who does not
          catch or divine the author's intention, misses it by far, even if he thinks to have found it.
          When having played the cadence in the <ref target="#m-243">seventh measure</ref>, the right hand has to play right away something more
          than the bald chords and sixths, for this can be done by the left hand alone.
          No counter subject can now be found prior to the <ref target="#m-668">20th measure</ref>,
          which has to be taken here and begins on the <hi rendition="#b">c</hi> with the third,
          and will be repeated four times, always one tone higher. One can easily conclude that afterwards,
          <ref target="#m-436">in measure 13</ref> the same is required once more, however, not with the third, but starting
          with the octave on the <hi rendition="#b">g</hi> the progression is repeated four times, always one tone higher, just as before.
          In <ref target="#m-668">measure 20</ref> the previous counter theme shows up in the bass, so it can be
          turned around and the progression that was before in the bass can now be used in the discant while still playing
          full-voiced chords. When it appears in the last half of the <ref target="#m-742">22nd measure</ref>, where three crotchets
          are, one is well advised to descent from C3 down to D2 for an imitation; but not forgetting the 6 and 5 in the bass.
          The <ref target="#m-809">24th measure</ref> alternates again the two subjects and in the <ref target="#m-1044">32nd</ref>
          one may play scales in thirds, and where the three crotchets are, one plays the just mentioned small imitation clause.
          I am afraid that the musical lawmakers will throw a lawsuit at me for using the C3 in thorough bass.
          But my defense is already done.
        </p>
      </div>
      <div n="2" type="section">
        <head>§. 2.</head>
        <p xml:id="p2-1">
          <ref target="#m-1220">The 37th measure</ref> and <ref target="#m-1253 #m-1295 #m-1334">the following ones</ref>
          require a special syncopation that must be taken from the previous music,
          while playing exactly the figures placed above.
          Since for everyone it might be hard to guess right, I will specify a bit of it for the juniors:
          <notatedMusic xml:id="music-example1">
            <ptr target="music-example1.mei" />
          </notatedMusic>
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="3" type="section">
        <head>§. 3.</head>
        <p xml:id="p3-1">
          Now this might be enough of instruction, everything else can naturally be deduced from it.
          However, in order not to be once again accused of demanding unwritten things to be played and the hangman
          (for he is an experienced fellow) has to guess what I want to have, I will write down some more measures.
          <notatedMusic xml:id="music-example2">
            <ptr target="music-example2.mei" />
          </notatedMusic>
        </p>
        <p xml:id="p3-2">
          And this shall be enough for one who does not know at all how to help himself.
          Those who want to stand for something and want to be of significance, must ex tempore
          bring out such things even finer
          and more elaborate than instructed here; otherwise they are, though not particularly bunglers, yet quite
          mediocre. I very much like that <persName ref="https://d-nb.info/gnd/1050676637">St. Lambert</persName>
          even approves to imitate the subjects or entrances
          of the arias in all parts on the keyboard when accompanying a single voice. His words are:
          <quote type="translation">
            When one plays the thorough-bass for one single voice and a brisk and lively aria comes up
            in which multiple imitations occur, as they often are found in Italian arias, one can imitate
            the subject and the entrances of the aria on the keyboard and play the parts as well, one after the other.
            But it requires a complete knowledge and it has to be a master of first rank for whom it is easy to play.
          </quote>
          For that, our test pieces can be taken as an example. I would like more of first rank to be in this
          world, but there are indeed too little. Those of last rank pretend to be the masters everywhere.
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="4" type="section">
        <head>§. 4.</head>
        <p xml:id="p4-1">
          The three following bars are done simply with thirds, which sufficently fill in an Allegro,
          and finally the two measures before the last one are done with the counter subject
          and a full-voiced bass until the end.
        </p>
      </div>

      <note type="on-key-signature">
          C minor (the ninth) is a <hi rendition="#b">very tender and also triste key</hi>, but since the first quality
          prevales and since one easily gets weary of the sweetness, it is not bad to enliven it
          a little with a somewhat cheerful and straight movement, otherwise one gets drowsy of its softness easily.
          But if it shall be a piece that needs to promote the sleep, one can spare this remark and
          can naturally reach the intention soon. Kircher calls this key: <foreign>accidentaliter mollem</foreign>,
          soft by chance, which is rather ridiculous. Concerning its characteristics he does not say a word.
          It would not be a bad curiosity to research, if by crass error or profound ignorance this <hi rendition="#b">tender key</hi>
          has not earned its place in neither the authentic, plagal or transposed modes nor in the church tones
          or gregorian keys? The antique stupidity is almost unbelievable and even less to be excused.
      </note>

      <note type="on-meter">
          C. means, that the measure has for subdivisions and four crotchets, two in downbeat and two in upbeat.
          Its use is in arias, allemandes, bourées etc. and it is almost always the ordinary, for why its also called the common time.
      </note>
    </div>
    </body>
  </text>
</TEI>
