<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
  <teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
      <titleStmt>
        <title type="part">Mattheson: Der Ober-Classe Sechstes Probstück</title>
      </titleStmt>
      <publicationStmt>
        <p>Niels Pfeffer</p>
      </publicationStmt>
      <sourceDesc>
        <p>Mattheson.</p>
      </sourceDesc>
    </fileDesc>
  </teiHeader>
  <text>
    <body>
      <div n="0" type="chapter">
      <head>Annotations</head>
      <div n="1" type="section">
        <head>§. 1.</head>
        <p>
          It has been said already, that everything, that one might want to add in these pieces to the right hand, is found in the bass
          sooner or later, so that it can be looked for and imitated. One would like to know here, if someone has so much reflection
          to play the present piece according to this instruction or if everything has to be given down to the last detail.
          Whoever wants to do the test, shall put away these remarks until he sees, whether his candidate has hit the
          right spot or not. He hits it - applause! He misses it – they have to be given to him, and after having taken the lesson
          he will be thoroughly surprised, that he did not smell the rat. Someone will turn up their noses just as Luther's society,
          when he raised their "Well!", and they will say: Oh! Is it nothing else than that? I thought it were wonders. Those instructions
          almost remind me of medicine, which one ardently demands, and when it has helped, one would like to know, of what
          it consists. As one hears that in it were nothing but ordinary ingredients, one loses the respect for the medicine, regardless
          of its good effect. This is nothing but prejudices; one shall let them go, especially in music, and shall judge the things
          according to no other principle than if it sounds good or bad – the setting might be artificial or simple, colourful or plain.
          It suffices if it sounds well.
        </p>
      </div>
      <div n="2" type="section">
        <head>§. 2.</head>
        <p>
          If it did not happen for the delight of upright people who want to make use of this little opus,
          I can assure that I let my good organists and their apprentices dangle for a bit longer before they get to know every
          trick in the book. I would show the decency to tell them right away: that the fourteen measures that the bass is playing
          before, can be repeated note for note in the right hand <ref target="m-456">in the following thirteen measures</ref>, and have to be
          modified a little only in the <ref target="m-903">fourteenth</ref> and <ref target="m-920">fifteenth</ref> measure.
          Now my organist will think – is this the fine secret? Well, that is something simple! Did I not say it would come like this?
          But do not sing the victory before triumph is there. Let us hear, how does it sound? Do not hesitate, go on, oh dear, go on;
          and consider the left
          hand: do not let the bass go along so baldly. If you cannot find the concordances so quickly, you have to proceed at least in octaves,
          until finally reaching the cadence in <hi rendition="#b">c</hi> with honours.
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="3" type="section">
        <head>§. 3.</head>
        <p xml:id="p3-1">
          The common reasons for bass variations are, that the principal notes appear first and the ornamental ones thereafter. But in
          the modern way of playing, especially, when a keyboard is played solo, one often changes it and
          treats them like consonances
          and dissonances, which also allow for <foreign>Note cambiate</foreign> or changing notes: For else it heavily opposes against
          the Compositions-Bocks-Beutel.<note type="footnote">The meaning is unclear. A "Bocksbeutel" is an ellipsoid type of wine bottle.</note>
          But when the principal notes are played after the downbeat, they have to be in a low register and the broken ones in a high register.
          In this way, the principal notes in the measures
          <ref target="m-282">9.</ref>  <ref target="m-310">10.</ref>  <ref target="m-340">11.</ref> <ref target="m-369">12.</ref>
          <ref target="m-399">etc.</ref> of this example are:
        </p>
        <notatedMusic xml:id="music-example1">
          <ptr target="music-example1.mei" />
        </notatedMusic>
        <p xml:id="p3-2">
          I do not know, whether there is something more legal, correct and clear.
        </p>
      </div>


      <div n="4" type="section">
        <head>§. 4.</head>
        <p xml:id="p4-1">
          Now there are nine colourful measures in the bass; and although from time to time one or the other figure has been left away,
          one may judge where a sixth or a b5 belongs.
          To those, who want to know, what the fundamental notes in those so-called colourful measures are, to which the arpeggiations
          are related, I want to show them, particularly since not always the first notes in a measure are the principal ones, but
          rather often are nothing but a filling voice. I said it were nine to ten measures; in the first four the fundamental notes
          are found immediately on the downbeat and beginning of every crotchet; in the fifth however things are different and in the
          four following measures one might have doubts whether to find them in the low or in the high register. Since in regard of variations
          much depends on this lesson of the fundamental notes, a student can get advice on that here and can learn to apply the present
          way to similar cases.
          <hi rendition="#b">The fundamental progressions on</hi> <ref target="m-954">p. 331 line 3 m. 5</ref><note type="footnote">i.e. m. 31.</note>
          <hi rendition="#b">until the end of the page are:</hi>
        </p>
        <notatedMusic xml:id="music-example2">
          <ptr target="music-example2.mei" />
        </notatedMusic>
      </div>

      <div n="5" type="section">
        <head>§. 5.</head>
        <p>
          But on with the text. What do you play on the
          <ref target="m-1245"><hi rendition="#b">d</hi> and its two crotchet breaks</ref>? And what in the <ref target="m-1265">following</ref> five
          or six bars? Take it from the previous music, but this time not note-for-note. But do not stumble, I advise you.
          You see, that in the nine bars, that I (Apollo shall forgive me) have called colourful, <ref target="m-1110">after the sixth
          measure</ref> the passage is changed a little. This one should like to imitate, when reaching the
          <ref target="m-1310">fifth measure</ref> of the so-called plain notes. If one is able to play the twelve last bars in thirds
          and sixths in the right hand with a good proportion, it will be lauded and it can be said about him: He has done well.
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="6" type="section">
        <p xml:id="p6-1">
          Concerning the sixths and fourths, the necessary has been said already multiple times; but whomever they do not
          befit in the way I want them to be, might rather play a chord in the <ref target="m-41">first</ref> and
          <ref target="m-100">third</ref> measure instead and play two times per crotchet. It will be legal and sound beautiful.
        </p>
      </div>

    </div>
    </body>
  </text>
</TEI>
