<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
  <teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
      <titleStmt>
        <title type="part">Mattheson: Der Ober-Classe Vierzehntes Probstück (english translation)</title>
      </titleStmt>
      <publicationStmt>
        <p>Niels Pfeffer</p>
      </publicationStmt>
      <sourceDesc>
        <p>Mattheson.</p>
      </sourceDesc>
    </fileDesc>
  </teiHeader>
  <text>
    <body>
      <div n="0" type="chapter">
      <head>Erla&#x0364;uterung</head>
      <div n="1" type="section">
        <head>§. 1.</head>
        <p xml:id="p1-1">
          Some alleged technician might stumble easily when sight-reading the piece. One wanted
          to say that it was not particularly necessary to write the <hi rendition="#aq"><foreign xml:lang="ita">Discretamente</foreign></hi>
          above, since here and there it might go on so meaningful, that few or nothing of it will
          be heard. However, the word is supposed to mean that nobody should play it too ungracefully
          but instead should modestly consider how and in which way to embark it in order to
          promenade neatly and carefully without exceedingly boasting. Even when sometimes he
          thinks to be above the things, wanting to laugh at it, there will be an unexpected stroke
          that will throw him off the track: and for this he has to credit his imprudence.
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="2" type="sect1ion">
        <head>§. 2.</head>
        <p xml:id="p2-1">
          From the
          <ref target="#measure-0000002110347575">eighth measure</ref> on it can nicely be varied
          in the right hand, which sounds even more strange since one is not used to it in those
          keys. I have tried it and applied a subtle arpeggiation throughout the piece, which
          sounded right. If somebody wants to know how it was done, I will share a bit here
          as an example, from which the rest might be deduced:
        </p>
        <notatedMusic xml:id="music-example1">
          <ptr target="music-example1.mei" />
        </notatedMusic>
      </div>

      <div n="3" type="section">
        <head>§. 3.</head>
        <p xml:id="p3-1">
          The sevenths in the
          <ref target="#measure-0000000128472588">eleventh</ref> and
          <ref target="#measure-0000001841425997">twelfth measure</ref>
          can well be treated in that way while the resolutions fall into the hands by
          themselves. It would unnecessary to write down something of it here since
          it will turn out to be in the just mentioned way. One must only play the right
          chord and move the fingers one after the other and it will be right.
          There is nothing rare or difficult about it, but it sounds well.
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="4" type="section">
        <head>§. 4.</head>
        <p xml:id="p4-1">
          Although the <hi rendition="#aq"><foreign xml:lang="ita">Discretamente</foreign></hi> and its presented explanation
          might mean that nobody must rush too much, I would nevertheless not
          like it to be turned into a Polish dance, for thus it would loose all its
          charm. I cannot leave unmentioned that the particular movement and the style
          in which a thing is played, gives it the right life, without which all sounds
          harsh and wooden. We often consider an ugly aria to be something unworthy until
          once we hear how it can be or must be played or sung, and thereupon it becomes
          our favourite aria. So much depends upon the execution: it makes the difference
          in music just like light and shadow, which are contending matters. Therefore I
          wished this piece in particular to be played with a certain movement, never too
          quick, but with care.
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="5" type="section">
        <head>§. 5.</head>
        <p xml:id="p5-1">
          Everybody will see that it is the same thing that shows up
          <ref target="#measure-0000000161042882">on the other page of the test piece</ref>
          and that it only appears in a different form because of the sharps.
          I consider this transposition very useful and ask the students to try the
          same and to diligently transpose the pieces that are not already transposed in here,
          since thus the key is not changed.
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="6" type="section">
        <head>§. 6.</head>
        <p xml:id="p6-2">
          But nobody must conclude that I wanted all nine keys to be
          enharmonically interchanged, although
          one may get acquainted with all the nine, for they appear
          often enough as relative keys. The <hi rendition="#b">#D</hi> as an enharmonic equivalent of the
          <hi rendition="#b">♭E</hi> and the <hi rendition="#b">#G</hi> of the <hi rendition="#b">♭A</hi> seem to be more
          necessary than the other seven: although <persName ref="https://d-nb.info/gnd/1050676637">St. Lambert</persName> and nobody else yet has recorded
          them. But those two keys are very different matter than all the other ones, since
          <hi rendition="#b">#D</hi> is as common as <hi rendition="#b">♭E</hi> and <hi rendition="#b">#G</hi> as common as
          <hi rendition="#b">♭A</hi>. <hi rendition="#b">#H</hi> on the other hand is a rather foreign guest, but
          <hi rendition="#b">C</hi> a daily one etc.
          Considering this I wanted to present only the D# and G# in two different notations
          here while leaving all the other seven behind and advising
          a diligent thorough-bass player to have a try at them. At cannot do harm, I guarantee.
          I am only mentioning nine tones that tolerate such an transposition
          because <hi rendition="#b">D, G</hi> and <hi rendition="#b">A</hi> are notated the same way until now
          when one of them is the root of the piece, as I have shown in
          the zweite Ero&#x0364;ffnung des Orchestre, p. 430 § 14. They can be expressed with
          two sharps.
        </p>
      </div>

      <note type="on-key-signature">
        Mattheson does not give any characteristics for this key.
      </note>

      <note type="on-meter">
      </note>
    </div>
    </body>
  </text>
</TEI>
