<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
  <teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
      <titleStmt>
        <title type="part">Mattheson: Der Ober-Classe Achtes Probstück (english translation)</title>
      </titleStmt>
      <editionStmt>
        <edition>digital edition</edition>
        <respStmt xml:id="pfeffer">
          <resp>translated by </resp>
          <name>Niels Pfeffer</name>
        </respStmt>
      </editionStmt>
      <publicationStmt>
        <publisher>
          <persName>
            <surname>Niels</surname>
            <forename>Pfeffer</forename>
          </persName>
        </publisher>
        <availability>
          <licence target="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0">
            <p>Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License</p>
          </licence>
        </availability>
      </publicationStmt>
      <sourceDesc>
        <p>Mattheson.</p>
      </sourceDesc>
    </fileDesc>
  </teiHeader>
  <text>
    <body>
      <div n="0" type="chapter">
      <head>Erla&#x0364;uterung.</head>
      <div n="1" type="section">
        <head>§. 1.</head>
        <p>
          Since in the common way of playing the thorough bass only few embellishments are added, despite in them being the greatest
          sweetness rather than in the quickness of the hand, I have, for the sake of variation, incorporated a little melody here,
          where a lover can not only make use of his principles as a keyboardist, but can at the same time show how one,
          who wants to be accompanied well, has to sing. It is not possible without, the essence of thorough-bass is the
          accompaniment of a singing voice: here one may easily see, how judicious and discrete one is, if he only wants to
          be heard alone or if he will give precendence for the singer? It can hardly be done well to back off in the
          right time, to help, to hold back, to embellish and to fill the harmonies where necessary, if he does not put himself
          in the singer's position and therefore will conceive and know from experience where a singer would keep back,
          add an embellishment or where he will rush over or break off. Those who accompany their own singing know best, how
          it has to be done, yet it is not given to everybody. Although there are a lot of singers nowadays, male and female, who pretend
          to accompany themselves, it often comes out so affected and sounds so poor and penurious as
          if the school-master has to be a barber or the pen-maker a glazier and an ensign at the same time. It requires much
          art to sing and to play the thorough bass for oneself, without defection in neither part.
          But whoever masters it, has for the most part reached the top in music regarding its execution. I know a lady of
          this kind in upper saxony that surpasses many men in that. Whether the person is blonde or black may easily be guessed.
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="2" type="section">
        <head>§. 2.</head>
        <p>
          But nobody should imagine this aria to be a solo work: for they have to come out very differently. A student of art
          may compare a <hi rendition="#aq"><foreign xml:lang="fra">Suite</foreign></hi> of the Capell-Meister <hi rendition="#b">Graupner's</hi> so called <hi rendition="#b">Partien</hi> for
          keyboard or from my <hi rendition="#b">Harmonisches Denckmahl</hi> or the <hi rendition="#b">Partite</hi> of the Capell-Meister Bach and
          he can easily tell the difference. Solo works need to be practised and whoever dares to play them ex tempore, is
          acting very foolhardily and intends to bamboozle the listener with his juggler's tricks even if he was the arch-harpsichordist
          himself. This piece is disposed so that one must play it right away.
          Even if for the first time it is not as flourishing and galant as it should be, it will get better the second and
          third time. This can be used a test. It happens quite right to us Germans when from time to time the giddiness is expelled from us.
          Other peoples do not insist so much on their <hi rendition="#aq"><foreign xml:lang="lat">ex tempore</foreign></hi>, on their sight-reading, on their
          <hi rendition="#aq"><foreign xml:lang="fra">à livre ouvert</foreign></hi>; and when to one of the Frenchmen is given the praise that he can play an
          <hi rendition="#aq"><foreign xml:lang="fra">Ouverture à livre ouvert</foreign></hi> it really means something and he is admired among his fellows as much as the children
          admire a box of curiosities. But here we think that all honour consists in <hi rendition="#b">sight-reading</hi>; who ever cannot
          sight-read is good for nothing. When a foreigner comes he will immediately be asked: Does he sight-read? Answer: so, so!
          Then one turns up the nose or shruges the shoulders which means that the one who just arrived was banished already.
          My dear people! <hi rendition="#b">Sight-reading</hi> has its merits which, if not preferred, at least should estimated equally.
          I cannot despise one who is diligent and first studies whatever
          he wants to play; it will come out even better. The best sight-readers often read worst. They entirely rely on their
          lucky birth and saunter about everything as if it was not worth the effort. They are permanently proud of themselves
          as if they were born with wisdom and had to be thankful to nobody. The fine and pure essence of music is entirely
          neglected. The judgement with which grace something needs to be played, the good taste, the emotion while playing
          and singing do not mean anything to those keen sight-readers. There is stumbling and juggling all the time and
          as soon as a thing is brought to an end it shall be called played right. Can you really sight-read? Well! Here
          is something to sight-read: just turn the page.
        </p>
      </div>
    </div>
    </body>
  </text>
</TEI>
