<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
  <teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
      <titleStmt>
        <title type="part">Mattheson: Der Ober-Classe Fünfzehntes Probstück (english translation)</title>
      </titleStmt>
      <editionStmt>
        <edition>digital edition</edition>
        <respStmt xml:id="pfeffer">
          <resp>translated by </resp>
          <name>Niels Pfeffer</name>
        </respStmt>
      </editionStmt>
      <publicationStmt>
        <p>Niels Pfeffer</p>
      </publicationStmt>
      <sourceDesc>
        <p>Mattheson.</p>
      </sourceDesc>
    </fileDesc>
  </teiHeader>
  <text>
    <body>
      <div n="0" type="chapter">
      <head>Erla&#x0364;uterung.</head>
      <div n="1" type="section">
        <head>§. 1.</head>
        <p xml:id="p1-1">
          In the first half of this Organisten-Probe, upon the occasion of the 22nd
          Prob-Stu&#x0364;ck, a little reminder was given for the lovers of inappropriate time-beating.
          Since I have a lot of respected friends who are afflicted with an addiction to beat
          the time, who are strongly inclined to it and who perhaps were not completly
          cured of it by the given reasons, I will have to have a word with them.
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="2" type="section">
        <head>§. 2.</head>
        <p xml:id="p2-1">
          For the time being I demand that they shall thank me, since essentially I wrote this
          fifteenth test piece for their pleasure, so that the favoured movement of their feet
          will not be inhibited. Finally, the word <hi rendition="#aq"><foreign xml:lang="ita">Schertzando</foreign></hi> (jesting,
          playful, trifling) was well-considered. Secondly I stipulate that nobody dares
          to beat downwards two times in a measure of two crotchets, since this would be
          an abuse of my forbearance. And thirdly I will ask those who are beating the
          time with their feet, to at least hold still their heads, without disquietting
          the whole body according to the known proposition, that <hi rendition="#b">what can be
          done by one shall not be done by many.</hi>
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="3" type="section">
        <head>§. 3.</head>
        <p xml:id="p3-1">
          It is strange! Our people do not want at all to learn the French
          diligence, kindness and ability in the clefs, their unity while playing
          and all the other good habits. But their air-boxing, fussing,
          fencing and twisting are things that tempt us Germans particularly,
          since we go to great efforts to ape them and pride ourselves
          much upon that.
          One should think, that when a such arrogated Frenchman chews something,
          accompanied by several violins, that he wants to ban the evil spirits
          with his strange gestures since from time to time he sings nothing
          but tender things.
          The most ridiculous thing is that he wants to beat the time to the people
          in the sweat of his brow with grave footsteps, although they know thousand
          times better than he what the beat is.
          Which dangerous bowings we see not when looking at some French violinist;
          everything cracks and quakes under his feet, his sleaves
          (especially in the boastful fashion) do not let any fly alive and are more
          effective than all fronds in the world. But when considering it at daylight,
          almost no correct fingering or bowing is heard of him, but all rests upon this
          puffery, upon this tedious appearance. Those are the people that encourage us to beat
          the time because it befits them. Once I played the thorough-bass to the
          so-called singing of a hoarse Parisian that did not know one note but still
          insisted to beat the time for me with her head, hand and foot.
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="4" type="section">
        <head>§. 4.</head>
        <p xml:id="p4-1">
          We need to beat the time in our big concertos and choirs only from
          necessity: just like a lame man cannot go without his stick. Now it is
          certain that such a man will never take pride in it, but will rather
          try to hide it as much as possible. So why should we so unnecessarily and
          needlessly boast about our auxiliary, the time-beating? Since it only
          serves to give those a support who limp in mob, so they can catch up and
          go along in good unity. <persName ref="http://d-nb.info/gnd/119116383">Donius</persName> writes<note type="footnote"><hi rendition="#aq">De
          tibicinum romanorum sui temporis imperitia sic loquitur: <hi rendition="#i">Demiratus
          sum minus, iis in usu esse rhythmum pedibus moderari: sine quo vix numeros
          exacte sequi unquam possunt.</hi> <bibl>Don. de Præst. Vet. Music, pag. III.</bibl></hi></note>
          about the Roman whistlers and their inexperience:
          <hi rendition="#b">The less I was suprised that among them it is common to regulate the
            time with the feet: without it they could hardly ever find the
            right time of the notes.</hi>
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="5" type="section">
        <head>§. 5.</head>
        <p xml:id="p5-1">
          Those French virtuoses should have noticed that, of which it recently was written
          from Versailles that they fell out with themselves regarding beating the time.
          The king's Capellmeister wanted to perform a piece that he did not write himself,
          but another composer. Thereupon the composer demanded to conduct it, since he
          knew best, how the movement of his composition was supposed to be. But the
          Capellmeister could not tolerate this intervention and took it as an offense of
          his honour that somebody wanted to cut short his conducting duty. The conflict
          proliferated so strongly that it had to be brought before the king who
          decided it like Alexander and ordered: <hi rendition="#b">There shall be no music in his chapel
          on that day.</hi>
          This was what those ambitious people reached. While in my opinion the composer was right,
          and the Capellmeister could have let it happen without loosing
          any conducting-honour, yet alsothe composer should have retreated instead
          of tolerating that the service gets deprived of its greatest beauty because of him.
          Thus those musicians are full of vanity and nothing is holy enough for them,
          that they were not to sacrifice it to such an inclination to the devil.
          They do not care much whether their skill gives uplift to a christian or whether
          it irritates him; if only a pretty number of listeners are allured and get
          astonished at their sometimes good and sometimes rather ridiculous ideas and whims.
          And although it tolerates many exceptions when this old church father is
          writing <hi rendition="#aq"><foreign xml:lang="lat">Non adest Ecclesia ut audiat mirabilia &amp;c.</foreign></hi>
          <hi rendition="#b">The christian community does not convene in order to hear things to
            be wondered about:</hi>
          for is it surprising that the listeners (as it expressis verbis is written
          in the Gospel) wonder in a place where many wonders
          are happening, sung and taught? It is not wrong to remind that to the ambitious
          conducting-lords, for they are afflicted in the sinful obsession that all services
          serve as nothing else than a comfortable opportunity to sell their
          their so-called <hi rendition="#aq"><foreign xml:lang="fra">Merveilles</foreign></hi> (for German stinks too much for them)
          and to defend their conducting regiment.
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="6" type="section">
        <head>§. 6.</head>
        <p xml:id="p6-1">
          Up to here we were talking against the exceeding conducting-desire <note place="foot" n="(*)" type="footnote">
          <persName ref="http://d-nb.info/gnd/13616059X">Lully</persName> has had the habit of beating the time by strongly knocking his Spanish pipe
          against the floor; but he died because of it, as his biography
          tells.<hi rendition="#i">Vid Crit. Mus. T. I. pag. 183.</hi></note>
          and against the ungodly ambition in which it results.
          But how would it be if we found directors that do not even know how to conduct
          themselves? but need someone to do it?
          A scholar from Breslau, G.E.S.<note type="gloss" resp="#pfeffer">probably Gottfried
          Ephraim Scheibel.</note>, wrote about it on the 28th of July 1728:
          <quote>
            I have been talking to a good friend here, who knows quite well the sly old
            fox and novelistic knight, the arch– – – and lampoonist D.M.
            <note type="gloss" resp="#pfeffer">Person not identified yet.</note> in Go&#x0364;ttingen
            rather well. He reported that he was the most massive fellow in the world,
            and being the director of the choir he did not even have the skill to
            conduct but needed someone else to do it for him while just beating with the foot
            and lagging behind etc.
          </quote>
        </p>
        <p xml:id="p6-2">
          Those are the enemies of the cantatas, the defenders of chorale notes so long
          that no measure is needed. We cannot hold against them that they do not tolerate
          what the do not understand.
          And for this pitiful reason I also look into the instance of the well-known
          <hi rendition="#b">Unschuldigen Nachrichtern</hi><note type="gloss" rend="#pfeffer">misspelling of
          Nachrichten.</note>, oder <hi rendition="#b">Sammlern von alten und neuen Theologischen
          Sachen</hi>, which recently gave again a forum for those bunglers, insulting the
          more good-minded musical world. Yes, I do not even read their silly objections
          and irresponsible slanders against all Christian love: for it is enough for me,
          that I sufficently recognize what sort of men they are and from where their
          sinful errors derive their origin: from sheer and gross incompetence in
          this matter and, associated with just that, a clerical presumption and collar-pride.
          If only those gatherers, who insist so much on the clarity, graveness and
          edifying nature of their old chorale idols, knew, how unclear, silly and irritating
          <abbr>e.g.</abbr> <hi rendition="#aq"><persName ref="http://d-nb.info/gnd/118569945">Lasso</persName></hi>,
          <persName ref="http://d-nb.info/gnd/119309025">Hammerschmidt</persName> etc. were proceeding in their
          compositions, in which the <foreign xml:lang="lat">Harmonia</foreign> was the <foreign xml:lang="lat">domina</foreign>,
          they would not embarass themselves, but rather change the tune. Yes, if those folks knew
          that this way of making music, which they condemn because of some performing
          it badly, is essentialy this way that they would have to praise when hearing others, they
          would for once be quite ashamed of their ill-timed and unscholar diligence.
          A palpable exemplary of the first point is found in the preface of this book,
          and of the second I will publish some at the next occasion, with God's help.
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="7" type="section">
        <head>§. 7.</head>
        <p xml:id="p7-1">
          It is impossible to write down all the embellishments that can be added
          in the present example. In
          <ref target="#measure-0000001663398635">measure 13</ref>
          one plays exactlx the notes that were in the bass in
          <ref target="#measure-0000001154082774">measure 11</ref>
          and moves down stepwise until the
          <ref target="#measure-0000000006167458">17th measure.</ref> In
          <ref target="#measure-0000000137302654">measure 18</ref>
          the right hand is playing the fair three or four measures of the
          beginning;
          <ref target="#measure-0000000169670186">Afterwards</ref> it follows
          the bass in thirds and full chords
          <ref target="#measure-0000000834671509">until the cadence</ref>.
          It is easy to guess that the main-subject is played again in the
          <ref target="#measure-0000002000489403">11th measure</ref> of
          the B section, likewise in
          <ref target="#measure-0000002000489403">measure 29</ref>ff.
          and again in
          <ref target="#measure-0000000489471879">measure 41.</ref>
          The last
          <ref target="#measure-0000001934716168">period before the <hi rendition="#aq"><foreign xml:lang="ita">da Capo</foreign></hi></ref>
          gives a good opportunity for elaboration, since it is repated.
          Ideally I student will seize the opportunity.
        </p>
      </div>

      <div n="8" type="section">
        <head>§. 8.</head>
        <p xml:id="p8-1">
          Now the promised aria appears in all simplicity and respect. I know for sure
          that one who did not read the previous having to play the melody as a
          test piece, will publicly laugh at the one, who gave it him: for indeed
          it looks as simple as it just could be. However, I would give something to
          see a dallier and cocky master being embarassed. I will not spoil the
          place: it will appear in time and the Algebraists will smell it from far away:
          Especially the Hof-Organist from Quedlinburg, who thinks the people to be cats.
        </p>
        <notatedMusic xml:id="aria-bottari">
          <ptr target="aria-bottari.mei" />
        </notatedMusic>
      </div>

      <div n="9" type="section">
        <head>§. 9.</head>
        <p xml:id="p9-1">
          It is to be noted, that <hi rendition="#b">C minor</hi> and <hi rendition="#b">F minor etc.</hi>
          have the same scope, modulating unexpectedly to
          <hi rendition="#b">D-sharp minor</hi> and <hi rendition="#b">G-sharp minor</hi>. It is nice
          to see an algebraist organist stumble in it.
        </p>
      </div>


      <note type="on-key-signature">
      </note>

      <note type="on-meter">
      </note>
    </div>
    </body>
  </text>
</TEI>
